
--- PAGE 1 ---
Hacking VMAF and VMAF NEG: vulnerability to
different preprocessing methods
Abstract—Video-quality measurement plays a critical role in
the development of video-processing applications. In this paper,
we show how video preprocessing can artiﬁcially increase the
popular quality metric VMAF and its tuning-resistant version,
VMAF NEG. We propose a pipeline that tunes processing-
algorithm parameters to increase VMAF by up to 218.8%.
A subjective comparison revealed that for most preprocessing
methods, a video’s visual quality drops or stays unchanged. We
also show that some preprocessing methods can increase VMAF
NEG scores by up to 23.6%.
Index Terms —video quality, VMAF, quality improvement,
codec tuning, objective full-reference metric, video-quality mea-
surement, video-codec comparisons
I. I NTRODUCTION
Video-quality measurement is critical to the development of
video-processing algorithms such as compression, video en-
hancement, adaptive network streaming, and super-resolution.
Despite the existence of objective quality metrics, visual
quality is often a primary means of testing new algorithms.
Perceptual quality is measurable through subjective evaluation,
yielding the most-accurate results, but because subjective
evaluation is complex and time consuming, it is unsuitable
for frequent use; objective quality metrics are more applicable
in practice. Yet to ensure precision, not just speed, metrics
must correlate highly with perceptual results. Today, a popular
and widespread full-reference metric is the Video Multi-
method Fusion Approach (VMAF), developed by Netﬂix in
cooperation with the University of Southern California. VMAF
is machine-learning based and combines multiple elementary
video features (VIF [1], DLM [2] at different scales, and
various TI measures) with the machine-learning-based Sup-
port Vector Regression technique. The regressor is trained
using mean-opinion-score (MOS) data to approximate its per-
frame values. VMAF has become popular thanks to its high
correlation with subjective quality, as proven by independent
researchers [3]. Since the ﬁrst release, its developers have
published two sets of versions: original models (0.6.1, 0.6.2,
0.6.3, and their variations) and a special “no-enhancement
gain” (NEG) model for comparing video encoders. A NEG
model emerged because video preprocessing can artiﬁcially
increase VMAF; this characteristic makes the original metric
vulnerable, and algorithm developers can exploit it to achieve
higher values. Our work’s aim is to show that VMAF can
be increased both with or without a change in visual quality.
We also demonstrate that VMAF NEG is susceptible to
preprocessing and can be artiﬁcially increased as well. We
propose transformations that considerably increase VMAF and
VMAF NEG, in addition to providing results from a subjective
evaluation in which the perceptual quality of VMAF-tuned
preprocessed videos either declines or stays unchanged.
II. R ELATED WORK
Tuning for objective metrics is used throughout the industry
to achieve better scores in video comparisons. It may, however,
decrease the subjective quality, just as tuning for subjective
metrics may decrease objective quality. The authors of [4]
analyzed the effect of video preprocessing on visual quality
and compared it with objective metrics. In their experiments,
subjective quality improved when the Gaussian-blurring PSNR
decreased. The results showed that a no-reference metric,
NIQE, correlated better with subjective scores for prepro-
cessed videos. But NIQE can also be inconsistent. In other
research [5], the authors demonstrated that NIQE has issues
when estimating the quality of dark and highly textured
frames. Many video-processing algorithms implement tuning
ﬁlters, which are especially popular for video encoders. For
example, x264 and x265 provide tuning options for PSNR
and SSIM, and recently, the developers of libaom implemented
VMAF tuning [6]. In their paper, they showed that preprocess-
ing enabled a substantial compression gain (the bitrate fell by
37.91% for the same VMAF), while rate-distortion optimiza-
tion enabled a much smaller gain (4.69%). The authors of
“Hacking VMAF with Video Color and Contrast Distortion”
[7] observed that histogram equalization and unsharp masking
can artiﬁcially increase VMAF by 5–6%, and other researchers
also proved VMAF’s vulnerability to preprocessing [8]. To
separate preprocessing enhancement from pure compression
loss, Netﬂix introduced a new metric model called VMAF No
Enhancement Gain (NEG) [9]. It recommends using the NEG
mode to evaluate codecs and the “default” mode to concur-
rently assess compression and enhancement. No independent
researchers have yet published an analysis of VMAF NEG.
III. P ROPOSED METHOD
Fig. 1 depicts our pipeline for studying how various trans-
forms affect VMAF. We transformed the input video using
various preprocessing methods, then calculated the VMAF
score between the preprocessed and original (“ground truth”,
or GT) video sequences. Next we compared the resulting
VMAF score with the VMAF measured between two GT
videos (as it can differ from 100 for two instances of the
same video, the value is usually around 100 [10]). If the
resulting VMAF score was lower than the score for videos
without preprocessing, an original video was kept and zero
arXiv:2107.04510v2  [cs.MM]  16 Aug 2021
--- PAGE 2 ---
gain was accounted in statistics. We tested several preprocess-
ing methods: tone-mapping algorithms (Drago’s tone-mapping
method [11], Mantiuk’s tone-mapping method [12], Retinex,
and Reinhard’s tone-mapping method [13]), contrast-limited
adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE), histogram equal-
ization, contrast-based transformations (gamma correction,
three-degree polynomial contrast transformation, and linear
contrast transformation), and unsharp masking. Our testing
included a combination of gamma correction and unsharp
masking, as well as a CLAHE tuned for VMAF NEG to
increase the VMAF value. In addition to the methods above,
we applied stochastic gradient descent to approximate con-
volution weights. (We slightly increased the value of each
cell, calculating the resulting VMAF value each time. Then
we found gradient-vector-approximation decomposition for
VMAF on each kernel weight using an approximate right-
derivative formula.) To ensure the approaches we considered
were suitable for real-world data, we constructed a data
set containing professional camera footage, user-generated
sequences, and computer-generated imagery. The total number
of videos was 618. Since VMAF models are designed for
FullHD resolution, all videos were FullHD. We calculated the
VMAF score for the entire video as the mean of all per-frame
VMAF values. Accordingly, varying the video lengths did not
affect VMAF judgment, so we used only the ﬁrst 10 frames
to ﬁnd the best preprocessing method. Most of the methods
we tested had several parameters, and each parameter raised
exponentially the computational complexity of an optimal-
combination search. To reduce the number of tested parameters
and accelerate convergence, our approach used the (µ + λ)
genetic algorithm [14]. Fig. 2 shows the methods that yielded
the highest gain values (e.g., the best tone-mapping method
and best trained convolution).
The results showed that CLAHE yielded the best VMAF
increase. The third quartile (top and bottom lines of the boxes
in Fig. 2) was an 86.8% gain, and the median was 50.2%;
the highest gain was 218.8%. In most cases where the VMAF
score increased considerably (more than 50%), the subjective
quality decreased. Examples of this trend appear in Fig. 3. The
VMAF score increased even when applying simple histogram
equalization without tunable parameters—in particular, the
third-quartile gain was 37.9%.
Fig. 1. Proposed tuning pipeline without compression.
Fig. 2. VMAF gain for different preprocessing methods. For examples with
negative gain no preprocessing was applied, so they have a zero gain for
statistics.
IV. R ESULTS VERIFICATION ON ENCODED STREAMS
VMAF is widely used in codec comparisons as a main
objective estimate of video quality—for example, in [15]. To
ensure our proposed approach is applicable in this ﬁeld, we
changed the main comparison pipeline by adding a video-
compression step before calculating VMAF, as Fig. 4 shows.
Our approach therefore calculated VMAF twice: once for the
compressed GT video, then once for the compressed and pre-
processed video. The plot below shows the difference between
corresponding VMAF scores (compressed and compressed
with preprocessing). We used x265 to compress the videos at
the following bitrates: 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 Mbps. We increased all
video durations to 300 frames to allow codec stabilization. The
results for several videos from the data set appear in Fig. 5 and
Fig. 6. For each one, the VMAF gain stayed the same relative
to the tuned but uncompressed video. The VMAF generally
increased more at high bitrates.
A. Subjective evaluation
To analyze how video preprocessing (which increases
VMAF scores) affects perceptual quality, we conducted a
subjective comparison. We chose six representative videos
that differ in spatial and temporal complexity as well as in
brightness. The crowdsourced Subjectify.us service allowed
us to receive an assessment from 114 participants. These
participants were to look at pairs of images processed using
different methods and then choose from each pair the image
with the best subjective quality. V otes from those who failed
to correctly answer the veriﬁcation questions (which exhibited
obvious quality differences) were excluded. The total number
of responses was 1,584.
The comparison included six versions of preprocessed
videos: GT (original), gamma correction and unsharp masking
combined, Drago’s tone-mapping method, CLAHE, gamma,
and unsharp masking. In a direct comparison, GT proved to be
better than the preprocessed video in 58.3% of cases, meaning
--- PAGE 3 ---
Fig. 3. Comparison of frames from original videos (top) and videos preprocessed using the CLAHE method (bottom). VMAF increased by 181.22% for the
video at left, by 147.30% for the one in the middle video, and by 114.75% for the one at right.
Fig. 4. Tuning pipeline with compression.
Fig. 5. VMAF gain at different bitrates. We tuned the ﬁrst 10 frames of each
video, then used x265 to compress the full 300 frames. Gains are generally
higher at high bitrates.
they were for the most part visually indistinguishable. In all the
videos, however, VMAF rose artiﬁcially by a mean of 46%.
The combination of gamma correction and unsharp masking
provided the worst visual quality. The highest subjective-
evaluation values went to Drago’s tone-mapping algorithm.
Fig. 7 shows the results of the comparison.
Table I provides the values of VMAF gain by tested pre-
processing methods. Drago’s tone-mapping method provided
similar gain on average compared to unsharp masking and
gamma+unsharp masking and much better visual quality.
TABLE I
VMAF INCREASES BY TUNED PREPROCESSING METHOD
Preprocessing method
Video
name
Gamma correction
and
Unsharp masking
combination
Drago’s tone
mapping method CLAHE Unsharp
masking
Along 11.39 19.69 41.62 7.92
Beach 18.41 16.02 34.27 18.4
Body 5.6 20.84 45.83 5.6
Building 64.9 28.13 52.83 65.03
Castle 22.17 24.21 42.63 22.22
Ocean 85.22 107.09 191.3 85.22
Avg. 34.62 37.00 68.08 34.07
B. VMAF NEG analysis
To explore the impact of the above-described transforma-
tions on VMAF NEG, we used the pipeline from Fig. 4
and replaced VMAF with VMAF NEG. The combination of
gamma correction and unsharp masking yielded the greatest
increase in VMAF NEG: 23.6%. The gain exceeded 5% in 15
out of 22 videos (Fig. 8), meaning video preprocessing still
affects the NEG version. Fig. 9 shows the other methods
that yielded the high gain values. However, visual quality
of VMAF NEG-tunned preprocessed videos is better, that of
VMAF-tunned preprocessing. Fig. 10 shows the examples of
frames with and without preprocessing.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper we described our investigation of methods for
increasing VMAF and VMAF NEG. Among the preprocessing
methods we tested, CLAHE showed the highest gain for
VMAF: 63.17%. Unsharp masking combined with gamma
correction increased VMAF NEG by 5.93% on average.
--- PAGE 4 ---
Fig. 6. Rate-distortion curves for original- and preprocessed-video compression. Each dashed line is for the GT video, and the solid line is for the preprocessed
video. The VMAF increase due to preprocessing is generally higher at high bitrates.
Fig. 7. Subjective-evaluation results. The ranks came from a Bradley-Terry
model for pairwise comparisons.
Subjective evaluation showed that preprocessed videos with
greater VMAF mostly have the same or worse visual quality.
The best visual quality came by applying tone mapping to
the original video.
Absent subjective evaluation, VMAF and VMAF NEG
should not be the only video-quality measure in a benchmark,
because basic video-processing methods can increase them.
We demonstrated that these methods can boost the VMAF
value considerably despite reducing or leaving unchanged
the visual quality. Developers of video-processing and
Fig. 8. VMAF NEG gain for different videos. The preprocessing method was
gamma correction plus unsharp masking.
compression algorithms can implement in a codec certain
tuning methods that may either have no effect or cause
visual-quality loss. In addition, video preprocessing can
artiﬁcially increase VMAF NEG, a valuable metric when
comparing codecs, by up to 23.6%.
Measuring subjective quality in video comparisons may
--- PAGE 5 ---
Fig. 9. VMAF NEG gain for different preprocessing methods. For examples
with negative gain no preprocessing was applied, so they have a zero gain for
statistics.
also provide controversial results, however. In our tests, tone
mapping applied to the original video ranked higher in a
visual comparison. Because viewers tend to choose the most
visually appealing image, objective full-reference metrics are
also necessary to check picture similarity with reference. Thus,
fairer and more-reliable comparisons require a combination of
different analysis methods and professional benchmarks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the Russian Founda-
tion for Basic Research under Grant 19-01-00785a and by the
“Intellect” noncommercial fund for science and educational
development.
REFERENCES
[1] H. R. Sheikh and A. C. Bovik, “Image information and visual quality,”
in IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 2006, vol. 15, no. 2, pp.
430-444.
[2] S. Li, F. Zhang, L. Ma, and K. N. Ngan, “Image quality assessment by
separately evaluating detail losses and additive impairments,” in IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia , 2011, pp. 935-949.
[3] R. Rassool, “VMAF reproducibility: Validating a perceptual practical
video quality metric,” in IEEE International Symposium on Broadband
Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) , 2017, pp. 1-2.
[4] J. Chilukamari, S. Kannangara and G. Maxwell, “Investigation of the
effectiveness of video quality metrics in video pre-processing,” in IEEE
Third International Conference on Consumer Electronics Berlin (ICCE-
Berlin), 2013, pp. 1-5.
[5] A. Zvezdakova, D. Kulikov, D. Kondranin, and D. Vatolin, “Barriers
Towards No-reference Metrics Application to Compressed Video Quality
Analysis: on the Example of No-reference Metric NIQE,” in CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, 2019, pp. 22-27.
[6] S. Deng, J. Han and Y . Xu, “VMAF Based Rate-Distortion Optimization
for Video Coding,” inIEEE 22nd International Workshop on Multimedia
Signal Processing (MMSP) , 2020, pp. 1-6.
[7] A. Zvezdakova, S. Zvezdakov, D. Kulikov, and D. Vatolin, “Hacking
VMAF with Video Color and Contrast Distortion,” in CEUR Workshop
Proceedings, 2019, pp. 53-57.
[8] J. Ozer, “VMAF is Hackable: What Now?”. Available: https://
streaminglearningcenter.com/blogs/vmaf-is-hackable-what-now.html.
[9] Toward a Better Quality Metric for the Video Community, Netﬂix
Technology Blog. Available: https://netﬂixtechblog.com/toward-a-better-
quality-metric-for-the-video-community-7ed94e752a30.
[10] VMAF GitHub. Frequently Asked Questions. Available: https://github.
com/Netﬂix/vmaf/blob/master/FAQ.md.
[11] F. Drago, K. Myszkowski, T. Annen, and N. Chiba, “Adaptive logarith-
mic mapping for displaying high contrast scenes,” in Comput. Graph.
F orum, 2003, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 419–426.
[12] R. Mantiuk, K. Myszkowski, and H. P. Seidel, “A perceptual framework
for contrast processing of high dynamic range images,” in ACM Trans.
Appl. Perception, 2006, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 286–308.
[13] E. Reinhard, M. Stark, P. Shirley, and J. Ferwerda, “Photographic tone
reproduction for digital images,” in ACM Trans. Graph. , 2002, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 267-276.
[14] H.-G. Beyer and H.-P. Schwefel, “Evolution strategies - A comprehen-
sive introduction,” in Natural Computing , 2002, pp. 3-52.
[15] A. Zvezdakova, D. Kulikov, S. Zvezdakov, and D. Vatolin, “BSQ-rate: a
new approach for video-codec performance comparison and drawbacks
of current solutions,” in Programming and computer software , 2020, pp.
183-194.
--- PAGE 6 ---
Fig. 10. Examples of frames with different preprocessing methods, tunned for VMAF NEG increase. Metric gain is calculated as a difference between VMAF
NEG score for preprocessed and compressed video, and only compressed video.